---
title: "Community Track Major Area Paper Comprehensive Exam Option"
subtitle: "Final Ver. 3"
date: "28 September 2016"
---

# Major Area Paper Rationale

The primary purpose of the Major Area paper (MAP) is for students to demonstrate a depth of knowledge in a critical area of community psychology. In addition, the MAP allows students to demonstrate an integration of theories, perspectives, knowledge, and research from across the scientific literature in the field. We also encourage students to use the MAP as an opportunity to explore a significant area that may form the foundation for their dissertation. Doctoral students may complete the MAP process after they have successfully completed at a minimum: (a) the required number of hours of coursework expected to support a comprehensive exam or major area paper; (b) a minor area of study; and (c) their Master's thesis process. Students are required to pass a comprehensive exam or optional major area paper as a prerequisite for doctoral candidacy and beginning the dissertation process.

The following guidelines outline the Portland State University (PSU), Psychology Department’s Community Psychology Track Major Area Paper (MAP) Comprehensive Exam Option.  Details are provided regarding the structure of the committee, timeframe for the process, expectations for the paper, and procedures for completing the oral defense of the student’s MAP.  Many of the associated requirements track closely with those of the comprehensive exam.

*Note that the minor area comprehensive exam procedures described in the graduate student handbook apply in their entirety to all community track members choosing the MAP option for their major area comprehensive exam.  In particular, note that this means that the minor exam proposal, the minor area exam, and the oral exam for both the MAP and the minor must all occur per the schedule and process detailed in the handbook.

# Committee Structure

There will be two community area faculty comprehensive exam committee members. A faculty member with expertise in the student’s minor area of study must be on the committee as well. In some cases, depending on the minor area of study, a third member of the committee will also be a member of the committee. A third member would be a faculty member from another Psychology area or PSU department with expertise in the minor area.  All committee members should be selected from the regular, PSU tenure track faculty.

In most cases the chair of the student’s MAP will be their advisor, given that MAPs are typically closely aligned with a student’s area of expertise. The role of the chair is to help guide the graduate student’s development of a MAP topic, support their proposal process, provide general guidance as the MAP develops, and to coordinate the final oral exam process.  The other community track faculty member of the committee will provide less formal guidance and support, as appropriate. They will review the MAP proposal, work with the student and chair to shape its scope and focus, and serve as examiners at the student’s oral defense.

# Guidelines and Timeline for the MAP and Oral Exam

As noted above, the MAP will serve as a comprehensive exam option for the PSU Psychology Department Community Track. The following section describes the timetable for completing this graduate training requirement, a description of the expectations for the MAP and oral exam, and steps necessary to prepare for the MAP and its associated oral defense.

## 1. Timetable.

The department recommends that students form their MAP committee immediately following the successful completion of their master’s thesis. Ideally, this would be at the end of the student’s second year or the beginning of their third year. The MAP may be initiated at any time during the academic year (summer meetings may be greatly limited by faculty availability). Note that it is the student’s responsibility to check any additional University guidelines regarding the comprehensive exam and comprehensive exam options.

To stay on schedule, the graduate student must complete the MAP by the end of their fourth academic year. It is recommended that students complete the MAP by the end of their third year whenever possible. The Department of Psychology requires that a student registered for full-time study pass the preliminary examination by the end of their fifth year. Except under unusual circumstances, extensions will not be granted beyond the fifth year. In fact, the current graduate student handbook indicates that students who have not completed their comprehensive exam by the end of their fifth year may be dismissed from the program.  MAP proposal and examination meetings should be scheduled during the nine-month academic year. Summer meetings will rarely be approved, given that faculty members’ are rarely on contract during that time. A student must be registered during the term in which he/she defends his/ her MAP.

## 2. Committee Composition and Approval.

As noted above, a graduate student’s MAP committee will be composed of two community track faculty members.  In some cases, a committee member may serve as both the minor examiner, as well as chair or Community Track member.  While the Office of Graduate Studies does not formally approve comprehensive exam or comprehensive exam committees, the Community Track faculty must approve the committee composition. Graduate students should not begin work on their MAP until their committee has been approved and their committee has approved their MAP proposal.  Graduate students are expected to prepare a brief proposal that provides a foundation for their MAP.  The proposal must include: (a) a list of their foundational coursework; (b) a rationale describing the significance of their area of focus (1 page); (c) a bulleted outline of the MAP (2-3 pages; see suggested MAP sections below); (d) the relevance of the paper to their dissertation topic (1 page); and (e) a reading list reflecting key articles in the literature to be included in the MAP.  The proposal represents a starting point for the MAP, will allow the committee to better understand the scope and focus of the MAP, and positions the committee to guide the graduate student’s development of the MAP.  The proposal must be submitted to committee members 2 weeks prior to the scheduled proposal meeting (see section 5 for more information about this meeting).

## 3. Content and Format of The MAP.

The MAP should be structured as a research paper in which the student: (a) provides a new integration of an existing body of literature that offers novel ideas, hypotheses, and/or theoretical perspectives; (b) identifies major gaps in the literature; and (c) discusses how those gaps might be filled. The paper cannot be a simple review of the literature; it must provide a synthesis or integration of theory, research, and/or practice on the topic and be issue or idea focused. The student’s goal should be to become a leading expert on the chosen research question and to demonstrate his or her expertise by providing an integrative review of the literature that moves the area forward. The paper should be original and not derivative of another paper in the field. The MAP should be written in a style that is consistent with articles in journals that publish integrative, non-empirical review papers. Indeed, one criterion that the committee should consider in evaluating the paper is whether it is suitable for publication in a leading review journal such as: Psychological Bulletin; Psychological Review; or Personality and Social Psychology Review. The minimum length for the MAP text is 40 double spaced pages and the maximum length is 60 double spaced pages.  These limits do not include front and back matter (e.g., title page, references, tables and figures). The graduate student and faculty committee chair should agree upon an approximate intended length of the MAP before the writing begins.  Although the structure of the MAP may vary some according to the selected topic, it is recommended that the MAP include the follow sections: (a) Background and Significance; (b) Theoretical Grounding; (c) Paper Parameters (e.g., key literature search strategy, focal data bases, key search terms, inclusion/exclusion criteria); (d) Methodological Considerations; (e) Integrative Literature Review; (f) Critique of Literature Strengths & Limitations; (g) Summary of Findings; (h) Applied Implications; and (i) References.

## 4. Incorporation of Community Psychology "Lens"

Graduate students are expected to incorporate a Community Psychology “lens” or perspective into the MAP. This may be accomplished in a number of different ways.  For example, the focus of the MAP may be around Community Psychology theories (e.g., Social Ecology; Empowerment), applied interventions (e.g., particular prevention approaches), social issues (e.g., poverty, social justice), populations (e.g., marginalized community members), methodologies (e.g., qualitative, program evaluation, multi-level analyses), and/or some combination of these areas. While Community Psychology perspectives may well be integrated into the “fabric” of the MAP, graduate students should expect oral defense questions regarding the influence of Community Psychology theories and concepts on various aspects of the MAP.

## 5. MAP Proposal Meeting.

A proposal meeting is required prior to the graduate student’s drafting of their MAP.  This one to two-hour meeting is designed as an opportunity for the graduate student to receive feedback from their committee and for their committee to help structure a MAP of an appropriate scope and depth. The MAP proposal will contain an outline of the content to be covered within each of the required MAP sections (see #3 above). At the end of this meeting, the students’ committee will confirm their acceptance of the students MAP proposal by signing an “internal” Psychology Department approval form.  Students must have a fully approved MAP proposal at least 90 days (three months) prior to their intended oral defense date.

## 6. Role of the MAP Chair and Committee.

Although the MAP is the work of the student, it is anticipated that the MAP committee chair (often the student’s advisor) may provide conceptual advice and support throughout the process. Given that the MAP is intended to be an independent demonstration of scholarship, it is expected that students will have limited discussions with their committee members as they develop their MAP. The committee members are not expected to review and edit or review and comment on particular sections of the MAP during the development process.

The MAP chair is expected to review the paper at the point at which the student indicates that the MAP has been written and closely proofed. It is the responsibility of the chair to determine if the MAP is appropriate for the oral defense. The MAP chair is given two weeks to review the MAP and make this determination.  If the chair determines that the MAP is ready to be defended, they inform the student and forward the paper to the other MAP committee members. Committee members must be given a minimum of two weeks to review and score the MAP. If the chair determines that particular sections need more work, the chair provides the student with adequate written feedback to enhance the identified sections and negotiates a timeframe consistent with the amount of revisions. The chair should not edit the document, but may identify sections in need of revision. Once the chair receives the revised MAP they should review the areas in need of revision within two weeks. Once these revisions are acceptable to the chair, the MAP should be forwarded to the other major area committee member who have two weeks to read and score the document.

Oral defense meetings must be scheduled to be held at least three weeks after committee members receive the final MAP to review.  Students should ask committee members if they would like a paper copy or an electronic document and provide them with the format preferred. All committee members score each of the students’ MAP sections (see #3 for sections) on a four point scale: “5” = Exceeds expectations (check plus); “4” = Consistent with expectations (check); “3” = Marginally below expectations (check minus); and “0” = Failing to meet minimal expectations. Committee members also calculate their mean score across the sections. The committee members forward scores for each section to the chair no later than 72 hours prior to the planned defense meeting. To proceed with the oral defense, the student’s MAP must receive an average score across the three raters of 3.5.

The chair must notify the student and the other committee member no later than 48 hours prior to the scheduled exam whether the oral defense will proceed. If the paper is not deemed acceptable for defense, the oral exam is cancelled. If the meeting is cancelled, the student will receive written and oral feedback within one week as to which areas of the MAP require revision.  The student is to revise the MAP based on these comments.  The defense meeting preparation process is repeated after the student submits a revised MAP to the committee chair.  If this revised MAP does not earn a passing score average from all committee members, the student will be dismissed from the doctoral program.

## 7. The oral exam.

It is the student’s responsibility to take the lead in scheduling the oral exam. The scheduling process should begin well in advance of the intended exam date (e.g., six weeks). The student will be invited to join the committee 15 minutes after the scheduled start of the meeting in order to allow the committee members a short discussion period. When the student arrives, she/he should give a 25-30 minute presentation of the MAP, typically using a small number of slides to illustrate major points. In the oral exam faculty will ask questions that stem from the MAP document’s key areas. The MAP defense should be focused on the central tenants of the paper and the particular Community Psychology “lens” that they’ve used to help frame their MAP. The graduate student should also be prepared to demonstrate knowledge in related areas of their field. Students are responsible for answering any and all questions. The oral exam will consist of two rounds of questions. In each round, each committee member will question the student with the Committee Chair establishing the order of questioning. Each committee member will be allowed up to 15 minutes of time to examine the student during the 1st round, and up to 10 minutes during the 2nd round. The time allocated to each examiner is intended to be used primarily by the examiner; other examiners may ask brief questions of clarification during that period but extensive questioning by other examiners should be reserved for their turn in the process. The Committee Chair is responsible for monitoring time and for gently enforcing time limits. After the two or more rounds of questions, the committee may decide to have an optional 10-15 minute discussion period in which all committee members can raise critical follow-up questions.

At the conclusion of the exam, the student will be asked to step out of the room and the committee members will determine whether the candidate has passed or failed the exam. Each committee member will score the student’s overall MAP according to the following: 5= exceptional, 4= satisfies norm of a solid Ph.D., 3= marginal, 2= too weak for marginal, but not a clear failure, and 0= fail. Performance on both the written and oral portions of the exam are evaluated together so that a student is assigned one numerical score for the overall MAP. The faculty are not restricted to integers when scoring. To pass, the student must have an average score across committee members (including the chair) of at least 3.8. If an average score of failing is assigned, the committee will choose between the following alternatives: (a) Student is dismissed from the PhD program; (b) Require the student to make revisions to the written MAP; (c) Require the student to retake the oral exam; (d) Require the student to make revisions to the written MAP and retake the oral exam.  The exam committee completes a Comprehensive Examination Report, which is then signed by the Graduate Committee Chair and sent to the Office of Graduate Studies.  Successful completion of the second examination requires a passing score from all committee members, and the committee composition must be exactly the same as during the first examination. A failing score on the second examination will render a student ineligible to continue in the PSU Applied Psychology doctoral program.

## 8. After the oral exam.

A student is not accepted as a candidate for the Ph.D. degree until the MAP, minor area comprehensive exam, and oral examination have been passed. Once a student has been passed on both their written MAP, minor area exam, and their oral defense they will be able to apply for doctoral candidacy with the PSU Office of Graduate Studies.  They will then be eligible for beginning the dissertation process to complete their doctoral degree.
